
Present: All the Justices 
 
BOBBIE M. DUGAN 
   OPINION BY 
v.  Record No. 000023 CHIEF JUSTICE HARRY L. CARRICO 
   January 12, 2001 
HELEN I. CHILDERS 
 

FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF FAIRFAX COUNTY 
Henry E. Hudson, Judge 

 
 In this equity proceeding, Bobbie M. Dugan (Bobbie), former 

spouse of Marvin E. Childers (Marvin), a retired member of the 

United States Army, seeks to impose a constructive trust upon 

survivor benefits received by Helen I. Childers (Helen), 

Marvin's surviving spouse.  From a final decree granting summary 

judgment in favor of Helen, we awarded Bobbie this appeal. 

 It appears from the record that Bobbie and Marvin were 

married July 29, 1951.  He retired from the United States Army 

on July 28, 1975, naming Bobbie as the recipient of his 

retirement benefits in the event he predeceased her.  They 

separated November 15, 1986, and were divorced by final decree 

of the Circuit Court of Fairfax County entered December 28, 

1987. 

 The divorce decree incorporated, ratified, and confirmed a 

property settlement agreement Bobbie and Marvin entered into on 

December 4, 1986.  The agreement stipulated that Bobbie was 

entitled to one-half of Marvin's retirement benefits.  Marvin  

agreed he would assign to Bobbie one-half of his income from the 



benefits and would notify "the Army Retirement for this 

purpose."  He also agreed to assign and nominate Bobbie "as his 

beneficiary for the purposes of survivor benefits under the 

terms of his military retirement." 

 Marvin married Helen in "approximately May, 1994."  Shortly 

thereafter, he changed his retirement benefits to name Helen as 

the survivor beneficiary. 

 On September 27, 1996, the Circuit Court of Fairfax County 

found Marvin guilty of civil contempt.  He was directed to 

change his survivor beneficiary from Helen to Bobbie. 

 Later in 1996, Marvin was hospitalized with cancer.  He 

died July 27, 1997, without having changed his survivor 

beneficiary from Helen to Bobbie.  Helen has been receiving 

survivor benefits since Marvin's death. 

 Several provisions of federal statutory law are pertinent 

to disposition of this appeal.  Under the Survivor Benefit Plan 

(SBP) established by 10 U.S.C. §§ 1447-1455, a military retiree, 

following entry of a final decree of divorce, may elect to 

provide an annuity to a former spouse.  10 U.S.C. 

§ 1448(b)(3)(A)(II).  The election must be in writing, signed by 

the person making the election, and received by the secretary of 

the appropriate branch of the military service within one year 

after the date of the decree of divorce.  10 U.S.C. 

§ 1448(b)(3)(A)(II)(iii). 

 2



 When a military retiree, incident to a divorce proceeding, 

enters into a written agreement to elect to provide an annuity 

to a former spouse and the agreement is incorporated into a 

court order or the retiree is required by a court order to make 

such an election but fails or refuses to do so, 10 U.S.C. § 1450 

(f)(3) becomes applicable.  In such a situation, the retiree is 

deemed to have made the election, provided the secretary of the 

appropriate branch of the military service receives from the 

former spouse a written request, together with a copy of the 

court order, that such an election be deemed to have been made.  

10 U.S.C. § 1450(f)(3)(A)(i) and (ii).  Importantly, the request 

from the former spouse must be received by "the Secretary 

concerned" within one year of the date of the court order.  10 

U.S.C. § 1450(f)(3)(C). 

 Finally, 10 U.S.C. § 1450 includes what Helen refers to as 

a "non-alienation" provision.  In relevant part, this provision 

states that "an annuity under this section is not assignable or 

subject to execution, levy, attachment, garnishment, or other 

legal process."  10 U.S.C. § 1450(i). 

 Bobbie concedes that neither she "nor anyone on her behalf 

notified the Army of the provisions of the agreement within one 

year of the entry of the divorce decree in order for her to 

qualify as the 'Deemed Spouse' under the provisions of 10 U.S.C. 

§ 1450."  Bobbie also concedes that the material facts were not 

 3



in dispute when the trial court considered Helen's motion for 

summary judgment. 

 In the hearing on the motion, Helen argued that the federal 

law expressed in 10 U.S.C. § 1450 preempts state law on the 

subject of a former spouse's entitlement to the survivor 

benefits of a military retiree and that Bobbie's failure timely 

to request a deemed election barred her recovery on a theory of 

constructive trust.  The trial court held state law was 

preempted and Bobbie was barred from recovery. 

 Bobbie disagrees and argues that state law, rather than 

federal law, generally controls in the area of domestic 

relations.  As a result, Bobbie opines, when Marvin failed to 

name her as his survivor beneficiary after he had been held in 

contempt for failing to designate her, he lost the right to name 

any other survivor beneficiary. 

 Bobbie cites two of this Court’s prior decisions as 

examples of the “balance” she says we have recognized in “these 

sorts of claims."  See Jones v. Harrison, 250 Va. 64, 458 S.E.2d 

766 (1995) (husband's undertaking in property settlement and 

support agreement to provide certain life insurance benefits for 

children of former marriage sufficient to impose constructive 

trust on proceeds in hands of surviving spouse named as 

beneficiary in replacement policies); Southerland v. 

Southerland, 249 Va. 584, 457 S.E.2d 375 (1995) (wife's release 

 4



in property settlement agreement of all right, title, and 

interest in property of husband effective to relinquish any 

interest she may have had arising from his life insurance 

contract despite fact he had not removed her as beneficiary 

before his death. 

 Neither Southerland nor Jones is apposite.  Both relate to 

property settlement agreements involving private insurance 

contracts; neither involves the provisions of a survivors' 

benefit plan governed by federal law and neither presents a 

question of federal preemption of state law. 

 Concerning preemption in general, the Supreme Court has 

said that “[i]f Congress evidences an intent to occupy a given 

field, any state law falling within that field is pre-empted.”  

Silkwood v. Kerr-McGee Corp., 464 U.S. 238, 248 (1984).  With 

respect to domestic relations law, the Court has said that  

“state interests . . . in the field of family and family-

property arrangements . . . should be overridden . . . only 

where clear and substantial interests of the National Government 

. . . will suffer major damage if the state law is applied.”  

United States v. Yazell, 382 U.S. 341, 352 (1966).  “The 

pertinent questions are whether the right as asserted conflicts 

with the express terms of federal law and whether its 

consequences sufficiently injure the objectives of the federal 

 5



program to require nonrecognition.”   Hisquierdo v. Hisquierdo, 

439 U.S. 572, 583 (1979). 

 This Court has not previously considered the question 

whether 10 U.S.C. § 1450 preempts the law of this Commonwealth 

on the subject of a former spouse’s entitlement to the 

survivor’s benefits of a military retiree.  Nor is there an 

abundance of authority elsewhere. 

 The Court of Appeals of Georgia considered the question in 

King v. King, 483 S.E.2d 379 (Ga. App. 1997), where the trial 

court had imposed a constructive trust on annuity benefits being 

paid to the surviving spouse of a military retiree in a factual 

situation virtually identical to the scenario at hand.  The 

Georgia court reversed, observing that while, under state law, 

“the SBP annuity was marital property subject to equitable 

distribution by the trial court[,] . . . the right to claim 

entitlement to an SBP annuity is also governed by and subject to 

conditions set forth in the SBP at 10 U.S.C. §§ 1447-1455.”  483 

S.E.2d at 382.  The court then held as follows: 

 The right to the annuity asserted by [the former 
spouse] pursuant to the divorce decree clearly conflicts 
with the express provisions of the SBP under which [the 
military retiree’s] surviving spouse is the beneficiary of 
the annuity.  In providing the means by which former 
spouses may become entitled to SBP annuity benefits, 
Congress enacted plain and precise statutory language 
placing conditions and limits on that right and made clear 
that any annuity benefits paid in compliance with the 
provisions of the SBP are not subject to legal process.  
Since the provisions of the SBP unambiguously preclude the 

 6



rights asserted under the divorce decree, we further 
conclude that the consequences of enforcing the conflicting 
state law principles sufficiently injures the objectives of 
the SBP so that federal law preempts the authority of state 
law. 

 
Id. at 383.  

  The Court of Appeals of South Carolina, in another factual 

situation on all fours with the present case, has also 

considered the question whether 10 U.S.C. § 1450 preempts state 

law on the subject of a former spouse’s entitlement to the 

survivor’s benefits of a military retiree.  In denying the 

prayer of a former spouse for the imposition of a constructive 

trust, the court stated in Silva v. Silva, 509 S.E.2d 483 (S.C. 

App. 1998), that it found “the reasoning of the Georgia court 

[in King] persuasive” and concluded “that the provisions of the 

SBP make clear Congress’s intention to occupy the field under 

these particular circumstances.”  509 S.E.2d at 485.1

 We also find the reasoning of the Georgia court persuasive.  

However, we would stress several points discussed in the portion 

of the court’s opinion quoted above.  First, the court stated 

that “[i]n providing the means by which former spouses may 

become entitled to SBP annuity benefits, Congress enacted plain 

                     
1 Bobbie argues King and Silva are distinguishable because in 
neither case was the military retiree found in contempt of court 
while, here, Marvin was found in contempt.  However, this is a 
distinction without a difference.  Whether a military retiree is 
found in contempt of court for failing to notify the appropriate 

 7



and precise statutory language placing conditions and limits on 

that right.”  483 S.E.2d at 383.  In this situation, the 

following rule becomes applicable: 

When a special limitation is part of the statute creating 
the substantive right, the limitation is not merely a 
procedural requirement, but a part of the newly created 
substantive cause of action.  The special limitation is a 
condition precedent to maintaining the claim and failure to 
comply with it bars the claim. 

 
Sabre Constr. Corp. v. County of Fairfax, 256 Va. 68, 72, 501 

S.E.2d 144, 147 (1998)(citation omitted).  Hence, when Bobbie 

failed to notify the Army of the provisions of her property 

settlement agreement within one year of the date of her divorce 

decree, her claim for survivor’s benefits was barred and could 

not form the basis for the imposition of a constructive trust. 

 Second, the Georgia court stated that “[i]n providing the 

means by which former spouses may become entitled to SBP annuity 

benefits, Congress . . . made clear that any annuity benefits 

paid in compliance with the provisions of the SBP are not 

subject to legal process.”  483 S.E.2d at 383.  The reference to 

“legal process” comes, of course, from what Helen terms the 

“non-alienation” provision of 10 U.S.C. § 1450, which states 

that “an annuity under this section is not . . . subject to 

execution, levy, attachment, garnishment, or other legal 

process.”  10 U.S.C. § 1450(i). 

                                                                  
secretary has nothing to with whether state law is preempted in 

 8



 The “non-alienation” provision would be sufficient alone to 

require a finding of preemption in this case.  Explaining the 

effect of a similar provision contained in the Railroad 

Retirement Act, the Supreme Court said “[i]t pre-empts all state 

law that stands in its way,” protecting “the benefits from [the] 

legal process” of any state.  Hisquierdo, 439 U.S. at 584. 

 Clearly, the term “other legal process” contained in 10 

U.S.C. § 1450(i) encompasses the imposition of a constructive 

trust upon annuity benefits.  A constructive trust is just as 

effective in thwarting the purposes of an annuity as an 

execution, levy, attachment, or garnishment, and the “non-

alienation” provision is intended to protect federal annuity 

benefits from all such legal processes. 

 Finally, the Georgia court concluded that “the consequences 

of enforcing the conflicting state law principles sufficiently 

injure[s] the objectives of the SBP so that federal law preempts 

the authority of state law.”  483 S.E.2d at 383.  We think this 

conclusion is amply supported.  To award Bobbie the survivor’s 

benefits she seeks would seriously conflict with and effectively 

cancel both the “plain and precise” one-year limitation Congress 

placed on a former spouse’s right to claim the benefits and the 

clear prohibition against subjecting an annuity to legal 

process. 

                                                                  
a given case.    

 9



 Bobbie submits, however, that “[o]ther state courts have 

held that under certain circumstances, the provisions of 10 

U.S.C. § 1450 do not preempt state law.”  Bobbie cites Kenny v. 

Kenny, 627 A.2d 426 (Conn. 1993), and Balderson v. Balderson, 

896 P.2d 956 (Idaho 1995).  But neither case considered 10 

U.S.C. § 1450 or an SBP.  Indeed, neither opinion even mentions 

§ 1450 or an SBP. 

 Kenny and Balderson both dealt with 10 U.S.C. § 1408, which 

embodies the Uniformed Services Former Spouses’ Protection Act 

(USFSPA), enacted by Congress in 1982 in response to the Supreme 

Court’s decision in McCarty v. McCarty, 453 U.S. 210 (1981).  In 

McCarty, the Supreme Court held that California’s community 

property law was preempted because "the application of community 

property law conflicts with the federal military retirement 

scheme," id. at 223, and "the application of community property 

principles to military retired pay threatens grave harm to 

‘clear and substantial' federal interests," id. at 232. 

 With the enactment of the USFSPA, "any court of competent 

jurisdiction," including a court of competent jurisdiction "of 

any State," 10 U.S.C. § 1408(a)(1)(A), may now "treat disposable 

retired pay . . . either as property solely of the member or as 

property of the member and his spouse in accordance with the law 

 10



of the jurisdiction of such court," 10 U.S.C. § 1408(c).2  

However, as the Georgia court pointed out in King, “nothing in 

the [US]FSPA or subsequent amendments grants the same power to 

the states with respect to the award of annuity benefits for 

former spouses under the SBP.”  483 S.E.2d at 382-83.  Hence, 

Kenny and Balderson do not support Bobbie’s position that the 

provisions of 10 U.S.C. § 1450 do not preempt state law. 

 For the reasons assigned, we will affirm the judgment of 

the trial court. 

Affirmed. 

                     
2 Under Va. Code § 20-107.3(G)(1), “[t]he court may direct 
payment of a percentage of the marital share of any pension, 
profit-sharing or deferred compensation plan or retirement 
benefits, whether vested or nonvested, which constitutes marital 
property and whether payable in a lump sum or over a period of 
time.”  

 11


